[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Three, two, one, and you
can look right into the camera.
>> Greetings, everyone.
This is Barbara Marx
Hubbard, and I'm in Byron--
(VOICEOVER) This is how
most people know me.
I'm a speaker and writer.
But more importantly,
I'm a teacher,
always reaching out to my
students wherever they are.
I teach teleseminars
and live workshops.
I lecture.
I make films.
I believe I have a very
important message for the world
to hear.
[CHATTER]
Our world is ripe for
change, and our future
can be astonishing if
we choose to make it so.
For decades, I've
made my life purpose
the evolution of our
species through co-creation.
I mean, my own path, I
started out in Washington DC
as a futurist.
The field of
conscious evolution,
which has been my study for lo,
these many years, and sometimes
I say, 13.7 billion years
if they ask how old I am.
>> [LAUGHS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Are there are any women
over 50 in this room?
>> [LAUGHS]
>> I have a new word for us--
it's regenopause.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> We are definitely
not declining.
We seem to be more vital.
And we are shifting from maximum
procreation to co-create.
If we're not going to be
having maximum number of babies
and dying young, and we're going
to be living many longer years,
and having ever fewer children,
and only chosen children,
at the best, and some
having no children,
the energy that went into the
vast effort of reproducing
the species is shifting to the
energy of evolving the species,
and it's as great as sex.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> We are shifting.
And what it means to have
a gentle birth rather than
a disaster catastrophe birth--
because it's going to change--
is going to be the degree to
which we connect that which
is already creative and here.
[APPLAUSE]
>> Barbara's quest is to--
one, it's sort of a
Paul Revere requirement
to alert everybody
who can possibly
hear about the coming
necessity for dramatic shift
in consciousness.
That's part A. Part
B is to inform people
what conscious evolution--
what it would look
like if we consciously chose
to evolve rather than wait
for biology to take
its time, when there
is no time for biology to work.
>> From what the
scientific evidence is,
we cannot keep over-growing
in the finite womb and heating
our climate, and
expect our civilisation
and our environment to survive.
>> Barbara is seen as the
mother of the entire field
of conscious evolution.
>> Not just the mother of it,
but the grandmother of it.
>> You can find that idea going
all the way back a century,
if not more.
But something about that
phrase, conscious evolution,
kind of captured it in a very
simple, understandable way.
When Most people think
about the word evolution,
they think about Darwin
and natural selection
and random mutation and
neo-darwinism and genetics
and adaptation, and fitness,
and all of those things.
But conscious evolution has
more to do with development
and evolution of human culture.
And it has to do with the
idea that we can consciously
shape and make
choices individually
and collectively
that can affect,
in a positive way, our future.
>> I think Barbara's message
has always been so rarefied
and progressive that people
who needed a very practical,
grounded, linear interpretation
of things were not really sure
what she was really saying.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Because Renee was saying,
everybody's talking about
the vision.
>> I try and talk about
what my grandmother is up
to to my friends.
It's really hard to
present it to them
in a way that doesn't
sound completely
out there, new wave,
kind of airy-fairyness.
But is something that's very--
that's actually
grounded and viable.
>> Renee, how do you and your
peers feel about the future?
Is there a sense of the
optimistic, pessimistic,
concern?
What's-- if you
could crystallize it?
>> I would say a resounding
ambivalence, really.
I have the naive
desire to make my time
on Earth count for something.
And so I think our challenge
is to stay true to our heart.
If I could have
chosen a granddaughter
to speak that way, that's
what I would have chosen.
[KISS]
>> Love you, Granny.
I was just thinking
how kind of bizarre
to think that I was
one inside of you
and you were once inside of you.
>> The human species has no
experience of a global crisis
or opportunity at this scale.
Barbara Hubbard is, what I
call, La Madre de La Conciencia.
And she's actually the
mother of consciousness.
>> Humanity is at a
kind of crossroads,
and things are either going
to get worse or they're going
to get better.
>> And one of the
things about the shift,
and one of the things about
being an American visionary
that Barbara gives us, is the
ability to take a look upstream
and see how we can be proactive.
>> And it's not
just little steps.
It's like really
what's possible.
It's the transformation.
>> Transformation can only occur
on this planet when you awaken.
But as long as you are asleep,
there won't be transformation.
The fear is eternal--
this is my moment in eternity.
If I lose my chance, I
may have lost it forever.
>> There were often times when
she felt like she wasn't being
effective.
No, she's referred to herself
as a failure, in some ways.
>> Surprise.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> How are you?
>> Oh, what do you know?
Something is happening to me.
>> There's so much going on,
it's a pretty raucous chorus
in there.
There's a lot of rocking
and rolling going on.
You know what I'm talking about?
>> I do because I have
felt a very unusual fear,
and it isn't about something.
It seems very, very deep and
not about a particular incident.
>> I think it's dread.
>> I wake up in the morning
sometimes with this clenching
in my solar plexus of fear.
And I'm trying to get in touch
with exactly what the fear is,
because it's not
that I think I could
fail at something that isn't
a natural planetary event.
But I have a fear
that we won't do it.
>> And she has this tendency
to feel driven, overwhelmed,
compulsive.
I mean, she's got to do her best
and there's not enough time.
>> I am, by far, more alive and
useful to anyone or anything
if I'm following
the deepest impulse,
which is to be a visionary
and to express vision,
than I am when I'm not at
all good at organizing.
>> There has to be some
organizational structure
for change and that's
not Barbara's thing.
And so either that has
to be attracted and then
really supported by
some kind of person who
would be willing to run
that, which she's not--
I haven't seen that
person come forward yet.
[DOORBELL RINGS]
>> OK, Stephen!
>> Hello, Barbara.
Hi.
>> Stephen Dinan invited me
to speak on the Shift Network.
And my program, Agents
of Conscious Evolution,
invited people to come
together to understand
the evolutionary story
and work together
toward a planetary birth.
>> She's been given
glimpses of the future,
templates that she's
lived in her own body.
And sometimes, there are
frustrations that she
was given these templates
and they hadn't manifested.
But her time was really
not fully until now.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Mayans, they add a long
calendar that ends on December
21st, 2012.
The media has made it
into a possible doomsday,
an end of civilization.
And there's a lot of
attention to that.
>> [SCREAMS]
>> The film "2012" is apparently
scaring people who actually
think the world may end soon.
>> So Barbara, realizing that
all this focus and attention
was being put on this date,
the end of the Mayan calendar.
So people were really focused
on, what's going to come next?
What's going to come next?
Oh my God.
So she thought,
well, if they're all
focused on something's
going to shift, something's
going to change, why
don't we give them
something really
valuable to embrace
as what's beyond that date?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> December 22nd, the
birthday of a new humanity.
Day one of a new era.
>> The idea was planted in my
mind that I should be telling
the story of the Birth
on December 22nd.
However, that's done is
still a mystery to me, but--
(VOICEOVER) And so I partner
with a fellow visionary,
Stephen Dinan, to plan
a big media event.
We're calling it Birth 2012.
We'll host a large
gathering in Los Angeles,
and people around the globe
will celebrate locally.
>> --for birthing a whole
planet, you have to--
>> It's not too bad.
>> [LAUGHS] The goal of Birth
2012 is to create a unifying
moment for humanity that marks
the beginning of a new era
for human possibility.
And our vision is to have
100 million people join,
in some way.
That could be through joining
a meditation practice,
a shared intention, watching
a video online, watching TV,
participate in an event.
>> I guess the idea was there
was going to be a lot of media
hype around 2012, so we'll
try to ride some of that.
I guess that's what it is.
As someone who's
been in the media,
I understand how
this stuff works,
and it often doesn't work
>> I was born right in the midst
of the Depression in New York
City.
My father, he had that
aspiration of America
at that time to make it
through, to keep on going.
He was a very
successful toymaker--
Marx Toys.
By the time I was 6 years
old, I had so many toys
that I learned one big lesson--
more toys can cannot
make us happy.
>> Their mother was
a gentlewoman, very,
very lovely-looking, very
easy to be present with.
>> My mother died
of breast cancer.
She was 33 and I was the
oldest of four children.
I remember very well it was
in the middle of the night
and my father came in.
He said, little mother is dead.
(VOICE BREAKING) And it
makes me cry to think of it.
And we all cried.
And he said, that's OK.
There's nothing to do but cry.
>> What was a kind of Garden
of Eden became almost like
a Charles Addams house.
All of a sudden, this beautiful,
loving, innocent being
was gone for no reason,
nothing that she did.
You couldn't make sense of it.
And I think that sent
Barbara off on the quest
for meaning for the
rest of her life.
>> My father was a great
influence in my life.
And I looked up to him and
I wanted to please him.
He was like a Lord God--
angry, jealous, frightening.
And I think he imbued me with
a sense of irresistible hope,
possibilities, and a ability
to create whatever we choose.
>> Her dad was a self-made
man, that can-do attitude,
that anyone can make
it, you can make it.
Reach your potential,
fulfill your dreams.
He had become incredibly
successful and very wealthy.
And they lived on Fifth
Avenue in Manhattan.
>> I had asked my father, who
was completely areligious,
what religion are we?
Oh, he said, you're an American.
Do your best.
So my religion because
being an American
and to find out what
to do my best at.
>> Two, one, fire.
>> The familiar
mushroom snakes skyward,
hurling the atom's
deadly radiation high
into the heavens.
>> So when we dropped the bomb,
that was the shift for me.
It was the fundamental
shift that the very power
that we thought was good, to win
over others and be successful,
was the very power that
could destroy the world.
So that shifted me
into the question
of the meaning of the power.
>> The mushroom cloud, for a
lot of people at that time,
it changed their conception
of the ethics of the human
experiment.
Now suddenly, it seemed
we have the capacity
to if not destroy
ourselves, really
set ourselves back in some
powerful, fundamental way.
>> The first major question
to shape my life was what is
the meaning of all our new
power in science, industry,
and technology, that's good?
And what are images
of the future
equal to this power that
we want to move toward?
Nobody knew.
I found the church didn't know.
Bryn Mawr College didn't know.
It was 1952.
I was invited to the Oval Office
because Eisenhower was a friend
of my father's.
I remember I was riveted
to his face and his eyes.
I said, Mr. President, I
have a question for you.
What do you think is the
meaning of all our new power
that's good?
He paused.
He shook his head.
He said, I have no idea.
And the way he said it was
momentous because I knew then,
nobody knows.
>> Barbara made
a determination--
I will be the one to
know if nobody else does.
I will not let this
question go unanswered.
>> And I think it's not unlike
what happened to the founding
fathers and mothers
of this country,
who saw themselves as in this
collision path with history
to the point of
committing high treason.
In their case, what
was burrowing into
them was this new ideal
the world had never
seen for a different
kind of freedom,
for a new thing
called democracy.
For Barbara, it was to have
a new kind of thinking,
a break with the past, where
the thinking of the past
couldn't begin to explain the
present, let alone the future.
So for Barbara, it started her
on a kind of an internal quest,
and it was both intellectual
and ultimately emotional.
>> She wanted the message--
not her message, but the message
that she was bringing forward
to be a household
word, to be something
that everyone in the world could
relate to as their mainstream
reality.
>> Conscious evolution is
happening in the sense that we
are aware we are affecting our
own evolution by the cars we
drive, the babies we
have, the food we eat.
And we hear that we could be
destroying our own life support
system, so we're
becoming conscious
that we're affecting
our own evolution,
even if in a negative way.
So that is not going to go away.
>> I think Barbara grows out of
the human potential movement,
which is everywhere, and
meditation, mindfulness--
it's on the cover
of "Time" magazine.
>> You can call
it lots of things.
You can call it the
conscious evolution movement.
human potential movement,
the spiritual but not
religious movement.
There's lots of words for it.
But I would actually call
her a New Age visionary,
and that's not a derogatory
term in my lexicon.
>> And there were many of
us that were moving in that
direction, but Barbara
was really the voice.
Barbara was the visionary.
She saw what was coming.
She could see the
future, if you will.
>> They say we'll get up to
nine or 10 billion people.
That is going to lead
to massive crises.
We've overgrown the
resources of planet Earth,
so there's going to
be even more poverty
and starving for awhile.
But as we get
through this, we will
have stabilized because
we will recognize
that we're all part of
one body, that we're
all part of one living system.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Hello, everybody.
I'm Barbara Marx Hubbard.
>> The collaboration between
Barbara and Stephen Dinan has
been very important because
he is a very grounded person.
He is a producer.
And he's also a visionary,
so they spark one
another's creativity.
He and his team have been
able to get her work out there
in the world.
>> The way I see Barbara is
that she has designed her life,
subconsciously, from a higher
level as a preparation,
an 82-year preparation to play
this role of being the midwife,
being the narrator, being
the prophetic voice for this
birthing moment for humanity.
I've just been laying out the
schedule for the Los Angeles
event, and it really is
starting to crystallize for me.
It's like just seeing how the
different pieces fit together
and this envisioning that--
like, newness, the moment
when we come together,
marking that as the
birthing moment, globally.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the coming months,
we're mobilizing this campaign
for a positive future.
We have a grassroots tour with
our beloved midwife, Barbara
Marx Hubbard, with 14 leaders
lighting the way, a TV channel,
and most important,
hubs of co-creators
forming around the world.
>> [LAUGHS]
[APPLAUSE]
Those of us who are celebrating
the birth of December 22nd
are rising up and
shining everywhere.
>> Please come on up
and receive your award.
[APPLAUSE]
>> All of the things that
she might have called success
started happening around her.
She started getting invited.
Somebody wanted to write a book.
Somebody wanted to make a movie.
There were people who wanted
to have her teachings.
She was traveling more.
She barely doesn't have
a minute now to herself
because she is so busy.
>> We are going now to the
assisted living that Sidney
lives in.
I have a challenge
with a beloved partner.
It's very painful to me to see
that loss of memory and loss
of vitality.
Hi, there.
>> Mama, mm.
>> Mm.
Yeah.
>> What I have with Barbara is
the need to be in touch with
her for her to re-energize
her and energize me.
A call with her, or a
time with her, or so on,
is very important to me.
>> He's almost 90 and
dementia has set in.
And when I go in
there, I literally
have to steel myself
against tremendous sadness.
You know how much I love you.
>> Love you, love you.
Thank you, Barbara.
>> Yeah. (VOICEOVER)
And I can't help him,
except go and be
with him every day.
But I can't take care
of him and do this work.
Crisis precedes transformation.
Birth is facilitated
by the crisis
that you can't go back
to do more of the same.
>> Barbara uses the term
that crises are evolutionary
drivers.
>> Overpopulation's a problem.
Pollution's a problem.
>> Dealing with climate change.
>> Ever-increasing consumption.
>> War is going on
all over this world.
>> It's kind of a crucible.
>> And so that has been a
driver of transformation out
of necessity.
>> The pressure of
these problems, in fact,
accelerates our need
to find solutions.
>> The things that are not
working are actually the raw
material for creating
this better world.
>> I was amazed,
on my book tour,
how many people are pessimistic,
deeply pessimistic about
the future.
They look out and
they see poverty
and the financial
crisis, climate change.
You tend to be more
pessimistic about things
if you think that the last
300 years were some disaster
and everything was
good before that.
If you don't see how bad things
have been, or how much worse
they have been, or how
much more unconscious
we have been in
history, then you
will be less likely to see
the current challenges we
face as a natural expression
of cultural evolution moving
forward.
And there's a whole
bunch of new theorists,
or new revolutionaries, in some
sense, who are proposing that.
>> For me, conscious
evolution, which I think is not
so widespread and maybe
won't be for some time,
is the awareness that we are
evolution becoming conscious
of itself.
That is so amazing,
that we are now
able to make some choices
to evolve ourselves
to a higher state of being?
I think conscious evolution
will be so attractive
that eventually, it will become
a dominant and well-known
worldview.
I think people who
are fundamentalists
of any kind, who have
a very closed system
idea of the nature of reality,
will not be attracted to it.
I am a journal writer.
I have 182 volumes of black
books that I've dated.
So I name every
journal as to what
I think the theme is
that I'm working on.
That's very meaningful to
me because my magnum opus
is in these journals.
My spiritual path,
for many, many years,
was asking questions,
listening, and writing
not by meditation or altered
states, but higher knowing.
And I found that if I could
stop thinking and writing
through knowing, direct
knowing, that I would be led.
>> She often refers to it as a
communion with her own higher
source.
And this is the essential
teaching of new thought,
that by contacting
that essential self,
you gain access to wisdom
and to a field of energy
and knowing that is
virtually limitless,
and out of which you
can create anything.
>> What came out in my own
writing was there's suddenly
enough people on Earth who
are able to love one another,
able to love nature and Earth,
that what is needed now is
the connectivity of the
people who already know this.
And when they connect,
you will not necessarily
have the rapture, but you
will have the resonance.
And so one of the visions of
a planetary birth experience
would be enough
people in resonance,
in the feeling of love.
One greatest
influencers in my life,
and the first love of my
life, was my husband, Earl.
>> They met in 1949, in
Paris, at a wonderful little
restaurant on the left bank.
And it was one of
those setups where
there were long tables and
people would just sit down
wherever there was a space.
>> And at that time,
I was attempting to be
an existentialist.
So I had a goulash
cigarette and I ordered
a half bottle of red wine.
When this young man came
in and sat opposite me,
and I boldly said, would
you like some of this wine?
I had a question that
had really become
a driving force in my life.
And the question
was, what do you
think is the meaning of all
this new power that's good?
And what is your
purpose in relationship
to this purpose of our power?
So I asked Earl
exactly that question.
And it amazed me when he said,
without a moment's hesitation,
I am an artist.
And I'm seeking a new image of
man commensurate with our power
to shape the future.
And it flashed in my mind--
I'm going to marry you.
[BELLS RINGING]
We returned to
New York to marry.
I had my doubts about
marriage, not about love.
I remember walking down
the aisle thinking,
you're heading for
a head-on crash.
But that was the
expectation of the day.
We lived in Lime
Rock, Connecticut.
Earl worked on his art
and we started a family.
Suddenly, I found myself
in Lime Rock, Connecticut,
pregnant in a little one-room
house with an artist husband.
And I remember waking
up saying, well,
where did Barbara Marx go?
When you think of a woman like
me having five children that I
adored, and I was a
24/7 mom, and I took
the children every
day to school,
every day to the frog pond,
every day to this, read
to them, loved them, they
were the joy of my life,
but it didn't even touch the
part of me that has vocation.
>> And she said, I
can't do this anymore.
I can't give my life
over to simply the PTA.
>> And that's about what she
meant I think Jonas Salk first,
and ultimately, Abraham Maslow.
And I think Salk particularly,
and to a certain extent,
Maslow, both
acknowledged that there
was something going on in her
head that was really vital.
>> Jonas Salk was the famous
inventor of the polio vaccine.
He was starting
the Salk Institute,
which would study how science
could help transform humanity.
I was immediately
drawn in by a project
he called, The Theater of Man.
I began to write the letter
as to what that should be.
It should be a place
we can celebrate
the emergence of the next
stage of human evolution.
And about two weeks
later, a phone rang.
Mrs. Hubbard?
Yes.
He said, this is Dr. Salk.
I read your description
of The Theater of Man.
You have stated my vision
better than I could.
Could I take you to lunch?
That conversation
changed my life.
>> He saw her, that she was
seeing something that was
different.
And that she was, in fact,
the cutting edge of evolution.
And to be seen like that for the
first time rather than neurotic
and discontent and what's
wrong with you, was revelatory.
>> But the bigger
revelation was yet to come.
It was a vision of the
future for all of us.
The second major question
that shaped my life
was what is our story
comparable to the story
of the birth of Christ?
In the gospel, there
was a simple story
that anybody could
understand-- a child is born
and then all the rest followed.
What's our story?
What's our story that would
be comparable to the story
of the birth of Christ?
One day I was taking a walk
in the hills above my home.
I'd been doing a lot of
reading about the great mystics
and spiritual teachers of
the past in relationship
to a positive
future for humanity.
But I couldn't quite bring
all of my thoughts together.
Frustrated, I suddenly
stopped and posed a question
to the universe--
what is humanity's new story?
In a flash, I was
catapulted into the future
and I could see a few frames
ahead in the movie of creation.
I was looking at
Earth from space
and I was a member of
Earth simultaneously.
And Earth was,
[GASPS] struggling
to breathe, running
out of energy.
I could feel the pain.
At one point, there was
a moment of shared pain
so great that we stopped.
And in that moment of stopping,
through pain came empathy,
came love, very
much like we've had
at 9/11, or at the terrible
tsunamis or hurricanes.
But usually, that empathy stops.
This time, it didn't stop.
>> And so she had a
mystical experience,
which was not unusual.
She's had many, but
this was potent.
>> I felt every basic social
system shift simultaneously
as innovations and
breakthroughs connected.
Systems of health and education,
economics and environment
began to coalesce seamlessly.
>> It was a vision like a film,
where we began to coordinate
and help each other
and live with empathy.
>> I think I had a quick
glimpse of what's actually true.
It's we are a
living system and we
have, through our internet,
through our communication
systems, through
our connectivity,
we're beginning to
knit together as one.
>> Out of this love
combined with power,
and it just occurs to me
that in our childhood,
we had power with our dad, who
was loving but also had rage,
like Jehovah.
And our mother, who was
very loving, but not potent.
And Barbara, in this
vision, saw humanity
combining our powers with
love, empathy, and creativity.
>> And in that moment,
I heard the words,
our story is a birth.
What Christ and all the great
beings came to Earth to reveal
is we're one, we're whole,
we're good, we're universal.
Go tell this story, Barbara.
>> She got her marching orders.
She was determined to go forth
in this bold, courageous way
to do whatever she needed to
do, to talk to who ever she
needed to talk to, to tell
people, to be that messenger.
>> The new story of the
evolution of our species with
us becoming conscious
participants was the story that
I'd been looking for.
And I then decided to
write a book called
"Conscious Evolution: Awakening
the Power of Our Social
Potential."
Because we'd had the
human potential movement,
but we really didn't have the
social potential movement,
or the self-actualizing society.
>> No, I'm really excited.
>> Well, a production meeting
is a place where you destroy
everything you've made before.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> Using the juxtaposition
of the Mayan calendar ending
and the world coming to an end
is great because it's not going
to happen.
So now what is going to happen?
>> [CHUCKLES] That's right.
That's why we call this day one.
>> Yeah.
>> There's several things
activating in India,
and then Jerusalem in Israel,
and then probably France.
And so there's basically
this kind of successive waves
that go around the planet.
And then we get to Los
Angeles, and that's
where we're gathering a
lot of the star power.
If we're fortunate, there's good
leads with Sting and Santana.
>> Who's the target audience?
>> For the leading
edge, New Age,
new paradigm kind of folks that
will be kind of more attracted
in at the beginning, those
are the people who tend to be
activating a lot of
events right now.
And then it's going to
kind of keep building
to be more and more mainstream.
It has to be accessible
to a broad audience
because I think it's going to
be seen by a lot of people.
>> The only answer to stopping
war and stopping destruction is
connecting up, very rapidly,
that which is creative, loving,
kind, and showing the shift
that nature and human nature is
actually doing now, but
hasn't yet become visible.
>> The shift is much closer
than most people realize.
We are already there.
>> What I'm seeing is this
massive shift worldwide,
waking up to the fact that
we don't exist in isolation.
>> A spontaneous
collective awakening,
and I think that'd
be really exciting.
>> And that love will be
the currency of exchange.
And I know it sounds a little
woo-woo and a little out there.
>> But it is happening.
When I think
tipping point, is it
going to be I wake up
tomorrow and it's happened?
Maybe.
>> I'm not one who really
buys into the Eureka theory
of personal transformation.
I think that change comes
one ah-ha at a time.
>> Yes, it's one
heart at the time,
but that can happen very quick.
That can go viral.
>> And we also have now is
the ability to reach seven,
eight billion people
around the world in a week.
>> And after a while, we reach
a geometric tipping point.
>> I wouldn't be surprised that
2020 we look back, and we go,
wow, this is when this
movement started to happen.
>> Well, I'm not sure if we're
going to see a flash point,
like on a certain date
everyone wakes up and goes, oh,
I want to hug.
>> There's been a tendency
to look for some date,
some event that is going to
represent a turning point,
that irrevocable moment when
culture is going to shift.
>> Our crisis is a birth.
>> We stand on the precipice of
a dramatic moment of choice--
extinction or evolution.
What will it take to turn our
crisis into a historic turning?
>> There's a romantic
idealism in that,
and the reverse side of that
is a sort of cynicism when it
doesn't happen, when
it can't happen.
>> People have been talking
about the end of the world
since the world began.
And often, it's not just
the world collapsing.
It's not the end times.
It's something rising out of
it, a new Eden, a new era,
the dawning of the
Age of Aquarius,
the rebirth, whatever
you want to call it.
And it's a powerful force in
the founding of this country.
I mean, our country was founded
by religious zealots coming
here, to the new world, thinking
it was the new Jerusalem,
it was the city on a hill.
>> And this idea that
we're all going to shift,
or wake up to a
new consciousness,
or go through some global
transformation like that, well,
all kinds of things
may happen over time,
but there's not going to
be some moment like that.
And there never could
be and there never
will be, in my humble opinion.
>> What is your highest
intention or expectation
for this event?
Describe that.
>> There will be a shift of
consciousness on planet Earth
during the planetary
birth experience.
We've seen it from
space-- we are one planet.
We are all members of it.
All the pioneers of
the peace movement,
the women's movement, the
civil rights movement,
the consciousness movement,
the futurist movement,
all those great movements,
they're toward a new culture.
We do have the
capacity, if we connect,
to meet the basic
needs of humanity,
stop fighting, and move forward.
When enough people feel
that simultaneously,
the consciousness will shift
and the behavior pattern
of self-centric
consciousness will diminish.
The stakes are everything.
The gamble is absolute.
The odds are millions to one.
Yet, I have no choice
but to do my best.
>> We have main engine starts,
four, three, two, one, zero.
Lift off.
>> My husband Earl and I
were focused on the question,
what new achievements had
the power to literally change
humanity in a moment?
It started, actually, with
the American Space Program
and the Apollo program, and
realizing we were becoming
extraterrestrials ourselves.
Then we began to speak
about it and write about it.
>> Many of the counter-cultura
movements of the 1960s and 70s
were anti-technology,
or anti-modern,
or even anti-American.
But Barbara, she was pro of the
space program, pro-technology.
She was optimistic.
She had this kind of
forward-looking vision.
She didn't want to go back
to a earlier, simpler time.
That optimism is so
quintessentially American.
She really kind
of carried forward
some quality of
her own upbringing
and of her father's maybe
simplistic and naive, but also
powerful optimistic vision
of what this country could
be and should be.
>> We saw it, really, as a
direction for human evolution.
>> They would go out together
and be talking about this,
but it used to be my father
mainly talking about it.
But he didn't have
that radiant quality
that my mother did,
being pregnant with this.
And people were
attracted to her,
and that really hurt my father.
>> All of a sudden, it became
unbearable not to be able
to have a stage of her own.
>> And the reason I left Earl
is I couldn't express my life
purpose directly with
him because he saw it
as a suppression of him,
or a rejection of him,
even though I thought
of it as an expansion.
When I saw the first human
footsteps on the moon,
I wept with joy.
We were being born.
We had breached
the tomb of earth.
We met with scientists
and astronauts,
and came up with a
new global goal--
to use the great technologies
developed in the Apollo program
to build new worlds
on this Earth,
as well as new worlds in space.
Together with my new
partner, John Whiteside,
we went to NASA to
see how it would
be possible for the people
to participate in the space
movement.
So John Whiteside and I
went to Werner von Braun,
and we said, we
would like to ask you
if the people could
rent a Saturn V
rocket for involvement.
And he was totally stunned.
He was amazed.
At first, he said, what?
And then finally, he said,
well, I don't see why
not if you can get $400 million.
And we had astronauts
that wanted to do it,
so we were taken in to look
at the Saturn V rocket.
And I quite remember taking
out of my purse, my lipstick,
and writing on this
huge Saturn V rocket,
"the people's rocket."
The vision of bringing
the people into space
almost happened.
Everyone said yes, except
the administration of NASA.
I was naive to think the
world could change quickly.
Simply because I could imagine
it didn't mean others could.
But I learned to say
yes to the possibility,
and I saw that big visions open
up other people's sense of what
is possible.
We were going to be able
to intentionally create
a more positive future,
but we couldn't do it
if we didn't have visions of it.
We couldn't do it if we
didn't have images of it.
I think that you might find
by 2050 that we have restored
and have become
sustainable on this Earth,
that we have moved
into self-governing
at a global scale.
As a nation state
and the cultures
that created them will probably
become cultural artifacts,
like the monarchy
in Great Britain.
War will be considered outmoded
and obscene and unnecessary.
I think we'll have communities
beginning in outer space,
in the solar system.
I think we will have developed
solar energy from space, which
will completely change
the economic system based
on fossil fuels.
I believe we will
have really developed
a monetary democracy
which is alternative forms
of complementary currencies
so that we're not
the victims of a monetary system
designed on debt and scarcity.
And since we are deeply focused
on understanding and getting
over these terrible
diseases, like cancer,
I think that we will have
discovered how to extend life
and how to improve
the quality of life.
The greatest blessing
is the freedom
to do your life purpose.
And in this society,
people will really
be yearning to be able to
give their gift and create.
>> Where you look
is where you go.
What I focus on becomes
what I call my reality.
>> The old saying is, I'll
believe it when I see it.
And that old piece of wisdom
has the sequence exactly wrong.
It's the opposite-- when you
believe it strongly enough,
you literally create the
conditions for seeing it.
>> This is no longer
a weird conversation.
This is a conversation
that everyone is having.
>> People can talk
about law of attraction,
and they can talk about creating
the reality and nobody looks
at you askance.
>> Please be skeptical.
Please don't buy
this, because it's not
possible to predict the
kind of transformation
and the kind of
evolutionary leap
that Barbara's speaking about.
>> But what great visionaries
do for us is through
their imagination, they see the
world as we want to create it.
>> I think our thoughts
shape our reality.
They change the way we
operate in the world, which
is very important, having
a positive attitude,
cultivating awareness
and compassion.
And loving kindness
is really important.
And that's a big part
of this movement.
But the idea that all we
have to do is visualize it
and it will happen, in some
ways, is a dangerous idea.
There's a kind of strange
kind of grandiosity,
an almost self-centeredness
in it, almost a narcissism.
Visualize world peace and
that's going to do it.
>> Welcome to our
second-to-last class.
Barbara?
>> We're clearly doing what
has not been done before.
We're clearly inspired
by a vision of potential.
What I've learned is the
most important thing anyone
can do beside loving is
saying yes to life purpose.
And that yes activates in
you the energy of creation.
>> She takes people out of
just being passive students
and really turns them in--
unleashes them.
>> The question is, what
has been born in you that is
of the greatest value to you and
your contribution to the shift?
>> --really being a part of--
>> As the Birth 2012
event approaches,
I'm connecting with my students.
We're declaring our
intention for the birth.
>> I am birthing a
learning environment with
and for my students.
>> I am birthing a book that
was conceived nine months ago
in meditation.
>> I am birthing a new
genre of entertainment,
transformational entertainment.
>> I would like people to
become so vocationally aroused
to gather together to deepen
their own life purpose,
to find their part in evolution.
As my father said,
you're an American.
Do your best.
I would say, you're
an evolutionary.
Do your best.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There's all kinds of things
that people really love that
the world really needs.
And there's ways
to monetize that.
You can make a living at it.
I always say, you can
do well by doing good.
And so, I have.
>> And this is how I
came up with the phrase,
vocational arousal.
Because when you get turned
on to a life purpose,
it will take the lid off
the top of your vocation.
>> It's a bit of an
elitist movement.
They do tend to be mostly
white and mostly older,
because it's for people
that already have
their basic needs met and
have the time and the money
to go to these workshops
and these retreats centers
and to do the work that people
are talking about when they
say the consciousness movement.
>> Often people say to
Barbara, you're just speaking
to the choir.
And she says, it's all right
if you speak to the choir.
She said, I may be
singing to the choir,
but the choir isn't singing.
Those that see the new
potentials in humanity,
the alternative
energy, restorative,
the new economics--
one after another, it's
rife with possibility.
And so one of her purposes
is to get the choir
to sing one of the most
beautiful melodies that perhaps
has ever been heard.
>> Buckminster Fuller, who
was one of her mentors,
had suggested she should run for
President of the United States.
And of course, Barbara's not,
in essence, a politician,
and she didn't feel
that was appropriate.
But what an honor to
have Bucky Fuller say,
I think you should be president.
[MUSIC PLAYING - "OF THEE I
SING"]
[APPLAUSE]
>> We are going to win.
>> It was the year of the
woman, the year of big brother,
and the year that you ran for
vice president, as a woman,
you could get a hearing.
>> How could she be nominated?
She had no political
background, no funding.
It was totally ridiculous.
But here is an example
of the power of belief.
>> She was labeled
as a New Ager.
And a New Ager in those
days wasn't particularly
a good thing.
It's considered to
be a great thing now.
>> But I was running, you see,
on a mission that transcended
politics.
>> Well, her vision in this
campaign was to create a peace
room in the Office of
the Vice Presidency.
And the idea was that this would
be a counterpart to the war
room in the Pentagon.
And in the war
room, what goes on
there is the tracking of all the
violence and the wars going on
around the world.
And in the peace room, the idea
was to track, map, connect,
and communicate all the good
news, all the good things,
the innovations.
>> So we had 90
positive future centers,
and they would hold the vision,
Barbara will be nominated
for Vice President
of the United States.
Doubt, doubt, doubt-- a
totally impossible goal.
>> The idea behind that, if
you hold an intent of what you
want, and you hold it
in the present tense,
that is the way things manifest.
And so that's what
these people were doing.
>> As president, I
will work for peace.
>> And she came to the
Democratic National Convention
that year with a boatload of
people who wanted her to run,
but nobody in the political
establishment, you see.
She had to have delegates
on the floor that
would place her
name in nomination,
or all the grassroots support
would mean nothing at all.
>> And of course, the Democrats
were horrified that this
unknown woman who was not
a force in politics at all,
that this could happen.
It was like, how did this
slip through the system?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Barbara Hubbard has a
message and a vision to offer
the Democratic Party and
the people of this world.
It is a message of hope.
It is a vision of the future.
Is with great pleasure that I
place in nomination the name
of Barbara Marx Hubbard.
>> And the guard took my arm to
lead me to the podium that we
had envisioned in all of
these small churches and yoga
centers.
>> The guard said, they
won't listen to you,
but tell it to the universe.
And by God, she did.
>> Thank you very much.
It is now in our capacity
to destroy civilization
as we know it, or
to build a world
of unprecedented
opportunity for all people.
We must bring together
the genius now focused
in the war room in a peace
room in The White House.
Its purpose will be to defeat
the real enemies of humanity--
hunger, disease, illiteracy,
poverty, and war.
With your help, I
can gather the people
to build the peace room and
the Office for the Future
in this administration.
>> She got people talking.
She created a conversation
that was happening before.
And she raised the whole
issue of women's empowerment
within the political system.
>> The great thing, for me,
about the vice presidential
campaign is I can believe
anything is possible.
This is--
>> Oh, mom.
>> Can you believe this?
>> I just can't believe it.
>> So I gave people
a transcendent goal.
It was to be nominated
for vice president
to talk about a peace room
to connect everything.
>> Do you think-- is there a
journal that describes that,
would you say?
>> Probably.
>> What year?
What year?
>> That was 1984.
"There are no obstacles.
Keep your discipline of
meeting with me every morning."
Me is my higher
self, my essential.
And how many little false
starts, apparently false
starts?
>> What is this map, mom?
>> How to get to the
peaceful transformation.
Well, none of these
things happened.
[CHUCKLES] The US-USSR
Symposium-- that happened.
The new politics-- well, we're
still lagging on that one.
I have done my best, but.
It's always been in the
transformational movement.
So just recently, we
received a grant and we
hired some professional PR
people because the news media--
I said, we're the news.
And then it turns out,
after hiring these people,
that I'm going to Australia.
>> Mm-hmm?
Mm.
>> So I won't be here.
Days before the Birth
2012 event in Los Angeles,
I traveled to Australia, where
the festival will kick off
the worldwide celebration.
At the airport, we
hear news reports
that some people are
panicking that the world will
end on December 21st.
Just as I'm getting
on a plane, the media
is looking for someone who has
the other side of the story.
>> World leaders and scientists
scrambled today to say the end
of the world is not near.
>> There is no threat
to Earth in 2012.
>> Seriously, folks, there's
been so much chatter about
this--
>> The Mayan calendar
predicts end of time--
>> --that NASA is reassuring
people on its website.
>> The paranoia is global.
Today, Russian
President Vladimir Putin
weighed in at a
press conference.
>> So now they're saying
we have the story we need
because it's on the front
page of "The New York Times."
But now they're
calling up the people
who wrote the article and
the Moscow correspondents
and what's actually
happening in Russia.
All of this just as I'm leaving.
Now for me, since I've
spent at least 50 years
saying this is the news,
it's very hard for me.
>> Now but you can still--
they're going to be looking
for talking heads.
>> And the thing is, also--
>> She felt that she wasn't
reaching enough people quickly
enough, that many of her peers
who absolutely adore her,
were somehow
becoming more famous,
were being asked to be on
television shows that she
hadn't been asked to be on.
There was a sense--
I don't ever think it
was for her personal ego,
but the sense that she was
failing in this mission that
meant everything to her.
>> I'm angry.
>> You're very wide awake.
>> It's no time to get tired.
>> OK.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> I'm angry at this.
>> I think it was more
than a heartbreak.
It was like a disruption that
really left kind of her spirit
fractured.
That this was the
birth to be announced,
and it was the particular moment
for the great announcement that
never happened.
>> We have to reframe
what we mean by news.
Currently, news is an
infantile nervous system
reporting on disaster
and breakdown
and putting us to sleep.
The new news is reporting on
what's emerging, creative,
and where we want
to go to create it.
You need both.
You need to know
it's breaking down,
but it will kill you
if that's all you know.
>> I don't watch television
news much anymore,
and I used to own
five TV stations.
>> The negative news media feeds
the general fear and hysteria
of the time.
>> It's been so driven by money
and interests that are not
coming from the heart.
>> There needs to be much
more of a solutions-focus.
>> There's always positive
things going on in the world
at the same time that
there is negativity.
>> And there's a lot of reasons
why any of us could fall
into pessimism.
And there's a lot of reasons, on
the other side as well, there's
a lot of things that are
better than they've ever
been in human history,
by dramatic margins.
And a lot of the pessimists
kind of ignore all that data.
>> And as someone who worked
on a newspaper for many years,
I understand that.
The fact is that conflict
and drama make a good story,
so we tend to focus on
those kinds of stories.
But there's a lot of
positive social change
out there that
doesn't get covered
and that no one's really
paying attention to.
>> I think she sees Birth
2012 as a way of us showing
ourselves to ourselves so
that we'll stop believing all
the negativity and all the
lack that we see in what is now
our mainstream media, and get
a sense that we're hitting
the surface with a new story.
>> Looking at it now, I don't
think we've hit our goal of 100
million.
But I think we got to really
accelerate to get to that.
>> Where are we at now?
>> I would estimate--
I don't know, just off the top,
speculating-- five million,
10 million?
Yeah.
>>There are five or 10
million people registered?
>> No, that that know about
this, heard about this,
seen it, read-- because
we get a lot of press.
>> So there's probably at least
40 events that we're going
to carry feeds from over
the course of the two days,
so that creates a lot
of technical complexity.
We're like three weeks away.
I mean, how do you
keep yourself going?
>> I made a commitment to do
an hour of meditation every day
from now until the
birth, regardless.
>> Everyone is excited.
But beyond the
anticipation, it's
important for me and for all of
us to visualize our intention.
We will reach 100
million people.
We will give birth to
a new era of evolution.
>> This is really a
fulfillment of a lifetime path.
>> Yeah.
>> Faithful to this, almost
15 years you've been faithful
to this vision and it's come
to fruition at this point.
>> Well, this has all come out
of your vision, originally,
Barbara.
[APPLAUSE]
Hello.
Everyone here?
Hello, world, out there.
And I am just so delighted
to be here and work with you.
[APPLAUSE]
Barbara Marx Hubbard had
been audacious enough
to run for vice president
and audacious enough
to envision a global birthday.
And it just so
happens to coincide
with her personal birthday,
so 83 years old and rocking it
out, Barbara Marx Hubbard.
[APPLAUSE]
>> Oh, you know, to actually
be alive at the very moment
of an awareness of a
planetary birth is, for me,
the greatest joy of my life.
[APPLAUSE]
Can you imagine the
love, the energy,
the creativity in this room
time thousands, times millions?
>> Yes.
[APPLAUSE]
>> December 22nd, 2012--
if you're watching this
video, it means one thing--
the world didn't end yesterday.
According to media reports of
an ancient Mayan prophecy--
>> She would like to have seen
something in the news about
people recognizing
that it's a new time.
But once the day passed,
it was like, silent.
And there was no
public expression
of a birth that had happened
and that something had shifted,
and that this was a new time,
we are moving into another epic.
And I think she looked for
that to be the new news.
And it just wasn't there.
>> I think by 2012, the
mainstream news media was
so sick of all these New
Age prophecies that they
didn't really pay
much attention to it.
>> She felt that this was a
fulfillment of her mission.
She was telling the
story of our birth,
and then not much
happened afterwards.
And she was exhausted,
also, physically.
And I think that the
fact that there wasn't
this magical transformation
that she believed
would happen, really happen,
that something big would
happen, momentous would
happen, it was very depressing
and she didn't know
what next to do.
And when Barbara
doesn't know what
next to do for her
mission, there's
a tremendous pain way beyond
what I think most of us feel.
>> I am depressed.
I have doubt as to whether it
is possible for people's effort,
including my own, to
make a difference.
I have lost my
arrow of evolution.
And I can't do it just by
an act of figuring it out.
I have to be guided.
Here's what I really love.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> (VOICEOVER) I
couldn't see the baby.
I couldn't see where the
culture was actually evolving.
>> With Birth 2012, well,
we made the announcement.
We experienced the
birth and we have
a global moment of oneness.
It was experienced by all of us.
And then we were like,
where's the baby?
Where's the baby?
>> Many of the students were
right there with Barbara.
They were in a
state of confusion.
Many of them were
disillusioned as well.
And I was receiving calls from
people wanting to know well,
why had we done all of this?
>> It was naive and grandiose
to think that that event would
change the world with the
resources that we had there
with it.
But I don't think
it's naive to think
that the world will change.
>> I mean, we can't create
it unless we sit down around
the table and at our computers
and at our meetings and figure
out how do you actually
achieve those goals?
How do you fund them?
How do you get
them into society?
How do you communicate them?
That, to me, is the difference
between activism and sort
of self-congratulatory
magical thinking.
>> It's very easy
to feel a failure,
particularly if you
have a big vision.
So I did feel a failure.
And I said, what shall I do now?
I'm going to meditate.
I'm going to bring the
highest frequency in and see
what happens to me.
Put this purpose first.
Put this purpose first really
is a spiritual requirement
to give your best.
>> Our father's pronouncement
that he kept saying--
do your best.
That has been a real motivating
force to do her best.
>> I don't think, in any way,
Barbara has failed at anything,
because I think she's done what
she was here to do brilliantly.
And now it's for the
rest of us to step up
and do the rest of the work.
>> My mission is to transform
educational systems around
the world to eradicate
poverty and hunger.
>> And we organized a national
tour speaking to school
assemblies about the environment
and what young people could do
to make a difference
in the world.
>> We're on a tour called
Inspire My Generation Tour.
And the premise
of that is that we
have all the same capabilities
that someone like Martin Luther
King, that somebody like
Gandhi have in our ability
to transform the world.
>> And one of the things that
I've always held in my heart
for Barbara and one of my deep
heart wishes is for her to have
a sense of fulfillment and
see that the changes that
she's envisioned all these
years are actually taking place,
and it's my belief
that they are.
>> And she's been a tremendous
inspiration to me, personally,
as she's been to thousands,
if not millions of people.
>> We are all catching
Barbara's vision.
It's not just your
vision, Barbara.
It's the vision of
eternity, and we've got it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We hear people all over the
world talking about the idea
of conscious evolution.
>> Without a doubt, I mean,
Barbara has done more than any
single evolutionary or any
single theorist to spread
the idea of conscious evolution,
to spread it very far.
>> She's really stuck with it.
And through a lot
of ups and downs,
maybe more downs than ups.
And I just respect her tenacity
and the strength of her vision
to continue with this.
>> I really went
back to my question,
what is our story comparable
to the story of the birth
of Christ?
I realized that story started
with a child born in a manger
that nobody could see.
Yes, the planetary consciousness
of a potential is born,
but it's in a manger, as far
as the mass media is concerned,
as far as general
public awareness.
It didn't show
up, but I knew it.
And I decided my
job, once again, is
to make the invisible visible.
[LAUGHS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
What are images of the future
that we want to move toward?
Crisis precedes transformation.
We have to reframe
what we mean by news.
I would like people to become
so vocationally aroused.
Now that I'm 87
years old, I have
joined in an
evolutionary partnership
with my friend, Mark Gaffney,
to initiate a set of projects
that we think can
actually influence
the world in a
positive direction.
>> (SINGING) I can see
laughter or I can see tears.
I see a choice of love or fear.
>> At that time, I thought
it might be from the Office
of the Vice President
of the United States.
Now we're heading for
the United Nations.
>> (SINGING) I can see--
>> Barbara Marx Hubbard,
a visionary, educator,
a person who has been
inspiring us for years.
And I think this house is
honored by your presence.
>> (SINGING) I choose love.
>> You should create
offices for the future,
whatever name we call them, and
invite people from every nation
state to join together
to solve the problems.
>> (SINGING) I see us healing
and the darkness dying.
I see us dawning as
one world united.
So what do you choose,
mm, love or fear?
Oh, we choose.
Oh, I choose the love with
freedom fire from my heart
where the light keeps shining.
And I choose to feel
the whole world cry.
a one voice rising.
And I choose to feel us
all united in the strength
that we can rise above.
I choose love.
I choose love, love, love.